CHAPTER V As I stood there musing over this too perfect
triumph of man, the full moon, yellow and gibbous, came up out of an overflow of silver
light in the northeast. The bright little figures ceased to move about below. A noiseless
owl flitted by, and I shivered with the chill of the night. I determined to descend and
find where I could sleep. I looked for the building I knew. Then my eye travelled along
the figure of the white sphinx upon the pedestal of bronze, growing distinct as the light of
the rising moon grew brighter. I could see the silver birch against it. There was the
tangle of rhododendron bushes, black in the pale light, and there was the little lawn.
I looked at the lawn again. A queer doubt chilled my complacency.
No, said I stoutly to myself, that was not the lawn. But it was the lawn, for the white
leprous face of the sphinx was towards it. Can you imagine what I felt as this conviction
came home to me? But you cannot. The time machine was gone.
At once, like a lash across the face, came the possibility of losing my own age, of being
left helpless in this strange new world. The bare thought of it was an actual physical
sensation. I could feel it grip me at the throat and stop my breathing. In another moment
I was in a passion of fear and running with great leaping strides down the slope. Once
I fell headlong and cut my face, I lost no time in stanching the blood, but jumped up
and ran on, with a warm trickle down my cheek and chin.
All the time I ran, I was saying to myself, they may have moved it a little, pushed it
under the bushes out of the way. Nevertheless I ran with all my might, all the time, with
the certainty that sometimes comes with excessive dread. I knew that such assurance was folly,
knew instinctively that the machine was removed out of my reach. My breath came with pain.
I suppose I covered the whole distance from the hillcrest to the little lawn two miles
perhaps in ten minutes, and I am not a young man. I cursed aloud as I ran, at my confident
folly in leaving the machine, wasting a good breath thereby. I cried aloud, and none answered.
Not a creature seemed to be stirring in that moonlit world.
When I reached the lawn, my worst fears were realized. Not a trace of the thing was to
be seen. I felt faint and cold when I faced the empty space among the black tangle of
bushes. I ran round it furiously, as if the thing might be hidden in a corner, and then
stopped abruptly, with my hands clutching my hair. Above me towered the sphinx, upon
the bronze pedestal, white, shining, leprous, in the light of the rising moon. It seemed
to smile in mockery of my dismay. I might have consoled myself by imagining the little
people had put the mechanism in some shelter for me, had I not felt assured of their physical
and intellectual inadequacy. That is what dismayed me. The sense of some hitherto unsuspected
power, through whose intervention my invention had vanished. Yet for one thing I felt assured,
unless some other age had produced its exact duplicate, the machine could not have moved
in time. The attachment of the levers, I will show you the method later, prevented anyone
from tampering with it in that way when they were removed. It had moved, and was hid only
in space. But then, where could it be?
I think I must have had a kind of a frenzy. I remember running violently in and out among
the moonlit bushes all round the sphinx, and startling some white animal that in the dim
light I took for a small deer. I remember, too, late that night beating the bushes with
my clenched fist until my knuckles were gashed and bleeding from the broken twigs. Then sobbing
and raving in my anguish of mind, I went down to the great building of stone. The big
hall was dark, silent, and deserted. I slipped on the uneven floor and fell over one of the
malachite tables, almost breaking my shin. I lit a match and went on past the dusty curtains
of which I have told you. There I found a second great hall covered with cushions upon
which perhaps a score or so of the little people were sleeping. I have no doubt they
found my second appearance strange enough, coming quite suddenly out of the quiet darkness
with inarticulate noises and the sputter and flair of a match, for they had forgotten about
matches. Where is my time machine? I began bawling like an angry child, laying hands
upon them and shaking them up together. It must have been very queer to them. Some laughed.
Most of them looked sorely frightened. When I saw them standing round me, it came into
my head that I was doing as foolish a thing as it was possible for me to do under the
circumstances in trying to revive the sensation of fear, for reasoning from their daylight
behavior, I thought that fear must be forgotten.
Abruptly I dashed down the match and, knocking one of the people over in my course, went
blundering across the big dining hall again, out under the moonlight. I heard cries of
terror and their little feet running and stumbling this way and that. I do not remember all I
did as the moon crept up in the sky. I suppose it was the unexpected nature of my loss that
maddened me. I felt hopelessly cut off from my own kind, a strange animal in an unknown
world. I must have raved to and fro, screaming and crying upon God and fate. I have a memory
of horrible fatigue as the long night of despair wore away, of looking in this impossible place
and that, of groping among moonlit ruins and touching strange creatures in the black shadows,
at last of lying on the ground near the sphinx and weeping with absolute wretchedness. I
had nothing left but misery. Then I slept, and when I woke again it was full day and
a couple of sparrows were hopping round me on the turf within reach of my arm. I sat
up in the freshness of the morning, trying to remember how I had got there and why I
had such a profound sense of desertion and despair. Then things came clear in my mind.
With a plain reasonable daylight I could look my circumstances fairly in the face. I saw
the wild folly of my frenzy overnight and I could reason with myself. Suppose the worst,
I said. Suppose the machine altogether lost, perhaps destroyed. It behooves me to be calm
and patient, to learn the way of the people, to get a clear idea of the method of my loss
and the means of getting materials and tools, so that in the end, perhaps, I may make another.
That would be my only hope, perhaps, but better than despair. And after all, it was a beautiful
and curious world. But probably the machine had only been taken away. Still I must be
calm and patient, find its hiding place, and recover it by force or cunning. And with that
I scrambled to my feet and looked about me, wondering where I could bathe. I felt weary,
stiff and travel-soiled. The freshness of the morning made me desire an equal freshness.
I had exhausted my emotion. Indeed, as I went about my business, I found myself wondering
at my intense excitement overnight. I made a careful examination of the ground about
the little lawn. I wasted some time in futile questionings, conveyed as well as I was able
to such of the little people as came by. They all failed to understand my gestures.
Some were simply stolid. Some thought it was a jest and laughed at me. I had the hardest
task in the world to keep my hands off their pretty laughing faces. It was a foolish impulse,
but the devil begotten of fear and blind anger was ill-curbed and still eager to take advantage
of my perplexity. The turf gave better counsel. I found a groove ripped in it, about midway
between the pedestal of the sphinx and the marks of my feet, where, on arrival, I had
struggled with the overturned machine. There were other signs of removal about, with queer
narrow footprints like those I could imagine made by a sloth. This directed my closer attention
to the pedestal. It was, as I think I have said, of bronze. But it was not a mere block,
but highly decorated with deep-framed panels on either side. I went and wrapped at these.
The pedestal was hollow. Examining the panels with care, I found them discontinuous with
the frames. There were no handles or keyholes, but possibly the panels, if they were doors,
as I supposed, opened from within. One thing was clear enough in my mind. It took no very
great mental effort to infer that my time-machine was inside that pedestal, but how it got there
was a different problem. I saw the heads of two orange-clad people coming through the
bushes and under some blossom-covered apple trees towards me. I turned smiling to them
and beckoned them to me. They came, and then, pointing to the bronze pedestal, I tried
to intimate my wish to open it. But at my first gesture towards this, they behaved very
oddly. I don't know how to convey their expression to you. Suppose you were to use a grossly
improper gesture to a delicate-minded woman. It is how she would look. They went off as
if they had received the last possible insult. I tried a sweet-looking little chap in white
next, with exactly the same result. Somehow his manner made me feel ashamed of myself.
But as you know, I wanted the time-machine, and I tried him once more. As he turned off
like the others, my temper got the better of me. In three strides I was after him, had
him by the loose part of his robe round the neck, and began dragging him towards the sphinx.
Then I saw the horror and repugnance of his face, and all of a sudden I let him go. But
I was not beaten yet. I banged with my fist at the bronze panels. I thought I heard something
stir inside. To be explicit, I thought I heard a sound like a chuckle. But I must have been
mistaken. Then I got a big pebble from the river, and came and hammered till I had flattened
a coil in the decorations, and the verdigris came off in powdery flakes. The delicate
little people must have heard me hammering in gusty outbreaks a mile away on either hand,
but nothing came of it. I saw a crowd of them upon the slopes, looking furtively at me.
At last, hot and tired, I sat down to watch the place. But I was too restless to watch
long. I am too occidental for a long vigil. I could work at a problem for years, but to
wait inactive for twenty-four hours—that is another matter. I got up after a time,
and began walking aimlessly through the bushes towards the hill again.
Patience, I said to myself. If you want your machine again, you must leave that sphinx
alone. If they mean to take your machine away, it's little good you're wrecking their bronze
panels. And if they don't, you will get it back as soon as you can ask for it. To sit
among all those unknown things before a puzzle like that is hopeless. That way lies monomania.
Face this world. Learn its ways. Watch it. Be careful of two hasty guesses at its meaning.
In the end, you will find clues to it all.
Then suddenly the humor of the situation came into my mind, the thought of the years I had
spent in study and toil to get into the future age, and now my passion of anxiety to get
out of it. I had made myself the most complicated and the most hopeless trap that ever a man
devised. Although it was at my own expense, I could not help myself. I laughed aloud.
Going through the big palace, it seemed to me that the little people avoided me. It may
have been my fancy, or it may have had something to do with my hammering at the gates of bronze,
yet I felt tolerably sure of the avoidance. I was careful, however, to show no concern
and to abstain from any pursuit of them, and in the course of a day or two things got back
to the old footing. I made what progress I could in the language, and in addition I pushed
my explorations here and there. Either I missed some subtle point or their language was excessively
simple. Almost exclusively composed of concrete substantives and verbs, there seemed to be
few, if any, abstract terms or little use of figurative language. Their sentences were
usually simple and of two words, and I failed to convey or understand any but the simplest
propositions. I determined to put the thought of my time-machine and the mystery of the
bronze doors under the sphinx as much as possible in a corner of memory, until my growing knowledge
would lead me back to them in a natural way. Yet a certain feeling, you may understand,
tethered me in a circle of a few miles round the point of my arrival.
So far as I could see, all the world displayed the same exuberant richness as the Thames
valley. From every hill I climbed I saw the same abundance of splendid buildings, endlessly
varied in material and style, the same clustering thickets of evergreens, the same blossom-laden
trees and tree ferns. Here and there water shone like silver, and beyond, the land rose
into blue undulating hills, and so faded into the serenity of the sky. A peculiar feature
which presently attracted my attention was the presence of certain circular wells, several
as it seemed to me of very great depth. One lay by the path up the hill, which I had followed
during my first walk. Like the others it was rimmed with bronze, curiously wrought and
protected by a little cupola from the rain. Sitting by the side of these wells and peering
down into the shafted darkness, I could see no gleam of water, nor could I start any reflection
with a lighted match. But in all of them I heard a certain sound, a thud, thud, thud,
like the beating of some big engine. And I discovered from the flaring of my matches
that a steady current of air set down the shafts. Further, I threw a scrap of paper
into the throat of one, and instead of fluttering slowly down, it was at once sucked swiftly
out of sight. After a time, too, I came to connect these wells with tall towers standing
here and there upon the slopes, for above them there was often just a flicker in the
air as one sees on a hot day above a sun-scorched beach. Putting things together, I reached
a strong suggestion of an extensive system of subterranean ventilation, whose true import
was difficult to imagine. I was at first inclined to associate it with the sanitary
apparatus of these people. It was an obvious conclusion, but it was absolutely wrong.
And here I must admit that I learned very little of drains and bells and modes of conveyance
and the like conveniences during my time in this real future. In some of these visions
of utopias and coming times which I have read, there is a vast amount of detail about building
and social arrangements and so forth. But while such details are easy enough to obtain
when the whole world is contained in one's imagination, they are altogether inaccessible
to a real traveler amid such realities as I found here. Conceive the tale of London,
which a negro fresh from Central Africa would take back to his tribe. What would he know
of railway companies, of social movements, of telephone and telegraph wires, of the parcels
of delivery company and postal orders and the like? Yet we at least should be willing
enough to explain these things to him, and even of what he knew, how much could he make
his untravelled friend either apprehend or believe? Then think how narrow the gap between
a negro and a white man of our own times, and how wide the interval between myself and
these of the Golden Age. I was sensible of much, which was unseen and which contributed
to my comfort but save for a general impression of automatic organization. I fear I can convey
very little of the difference to your mind. In the matter of Sepulchre, for instance,
I could see no signs of crematoria nor anything suggestive of tombs, but it occurred to me
that possibly there might be cemeteries or crematoria somewhere beyond the range of my
explorings. This again was a question I deliberately put to myself, and my curiosity was at first
entirely defeated upon the point. The thing puzzled me, and I was led to make a further
remark which puzzled me still more, that aged and infirm among this people there were none.
I must confess that my satisfaction with my first theories of an automatic civilization
and a decadent humanity did not long endure, yet I could think of no other. Let me put
my difficulties. The several big palaces I had explored were mere living places, great
dining halls, and sleeping apartments. I could find no machinery, no appliances of
any kind, yet these people were clothed in pleasant fabrics that must at times need renewal,
and their sandals, though undecorated, were fairly complex specimens of metalwork. Somehow
such things must be made, and the little people displayed no vestige of a creative tendency.
There were no shops, no workshops, no sign of importations among them. They spent all
their time in playing gently, in bathing in the river, in making love in a half- playful
fashion, in eating fruit and sleeping. I could not see how things were kept going. Then again
about the time machine. Something. I knew not what had taken it into the hollow pedestal
of the white sphinx. Why? For the life of me I could not imagine. Those waterless wells
too, those flickering pillars. I felt I lacked a clue. I felt, how shall I put it, suppose
you found an inscription with sentences here and there in excellent plain English, and
perplated therewith others made up of words, of letters even, absolutely unknown to you.
Well on the third day of my visit, that was how the world of 802,701 presented itself
to me. That day too I made a friend of a sort. It happened that as I was watching some of
the little people bathing in a shallow, one of them was seized with a cramp and began
drifting downstream. The main current ran rather swiftly, but not too strongly for even
a moderate swimmer. It will give you an idea, therefore, of the strange deficiency in these
creatures when I tell you that none made the slightest attempt to rescue the weakly crying
little thing which was drowning before their eyes. When I realized this, I hurriedly slipped
off my clothes and wading in at a point lower down, I caught the poor mite and drew her
safe to land. A little rubbing of the limbs soon brought her round, and I had the satisfaction
of seeing she was all right before I left her. I had got to such a low estimate of her
kind that I did not expect any gratitude from her. In that, however, I was wrong.
This happened in the morning. In the afternoon I met my little woman, as I believe it was,
as I was returning towards my centre from an exploration, and she received me with cries
of delight and presented me with a big garland of flowers, evidently made for me and me alone.
The thing took my imagination. Very possibly, I had been feeling desolate. At any rate,
I did my best to display my appreciation of the gift. We were soon seated together in
a little stone arbour, engaged in conversation, chiefly of smiles. The creature's friendliness
affected me exactly as a child's might have done. We passed each other flowers, and she
kissed my hands. I did the same to hers. Then I tried talk, and found that her name was
Weena, which, though I don't know what it meant, somehow seemed appropriate enough.
That was the beginning of a queer friendship which lasted a week, and ended, as I will
tell you.
She was exactly like a child. She wanted to be with me always. She tried to follow me
everywhere, and on my next journey out and about, it went to my heart to tire her down
and leave her, at last, exhausted and calling after me rather plaintively. But the problems
of the world had to be mastered. I had not, I said to myself, come into the future to
carry on a miniature flirtation. Yet her distress when I left her was very great. Her expostulations
at the parting were sometimes frantic, and I think altogether I had as much trouble as
comfort from her devotion. Nevertheless, she was, somehow, a very great comfort. I thought
it was mere childish affection that made her cling to me. Until it was too late, I did
not clearly know what I had inflicted upon her when I left her, nor until it was too
late did I clearly understand what she was to me. For by merely seeming fond of me and
showing in her weak, futile way that she cared for me, the little doll of a creature presently
gave my return to the neighborhood of the white sphinx almost the feeling of coming
home, and I would watch for her tiny figure of white and gold so soon as I came over the
It was from her, too, that I learned that fear had not yet left the world. She was fearless
enough in the daylight, and she had the oddest confidence in me, for once, in a foolish moment,
I made threatening grimaces at her, and she simply laughed at them. But she dreaded the
dark, dreaded shadows, dreaded black things. Darkness to her was the one thing dreadful.
It was a singularly passionate emotion, and it set me thinking and observing. I discovered
then, among other things, that these little people gathered into the great houses after
dark and slept in droves. To enter upon them without a light was to put them into a tumult
of apprehension. I never found one out of doors or sleeping alone within doors after
dark. Yet I was still such a blockhead that I missed the lesson of that fear, and in spite
of Weiner's distress, I insisted upon sleeping away from these slumbering multitudes. It
troubled her greatly, but in the end her odd affection for me triumphed, and for five of
the nights of our acquaintance, including the last night of all, she slept with her
head pillowed on my arm. But my story slips away from me as I speak of her. It must have
been the night before her rescue that I was awakened about dawn. I had been restless,
dreaming most disagreeably that I was drowned, and that sea-anemones were feeling over my
face with their soft palps. I woke with a start, and with an odd fancy that some greyish
animal had just rushed out of the chamber. I tried to get to sleep again, but I felt
restless and uncomfortable. It was that dim grey hour when things are just creeping out
of darkness, when everything is colourless and clear-cut, and yet unreal. I got up and
went down into the great hall, and saw out upon the flagstones in front of the palace.
I thought I could make a virtue of necessity and see the sunrise. The moon was setting,
and the dying moonlight and the first pallor of dawn were mingled in a ghastly half-light.
The bushes were inky black, the ground a sombre grey, the sky colourless and cheerless, and
up the hill I thought I could see ghosts. There, several times, as I scanned the slope,
I saw white figures. Twice I fancied I saw a solitary white ape-like creature running
rather quickly up the hill, and once near the ruins I saw a leash of them carrying some
dark body. They moved hastily. I did not see what became of them. It seemed that they vanished
among the bushes. The dawn was still indistinct, you must understand. I was feeling that chill,
uncertain, early-morning feeling you may have known. I doubted my eyes.
As the eastern sky grew brighter and the light of the day came on, and its vivid colouring
turned upon the world once more, I scanned the view keenly, but I saw no vestige of my
white figures. They were mere creatures of the half-light.
They must have been ghosts, I said. I wonder whence they dated.
For a queer notion of Grant Allen's came into my head and amused me. If each generation
die and leave ghosts, he argued, the world at last will get overcrowded with them. On
that theory they would have grown innumerable some eight hundred thousand years hence, and
it was no great wonder to see four at once. But the jest was unsatisfying, and I was thinking
of these figures all the morning, until Weena's rescue drove them out of my head. I associated
them in some indefinite way with the white animal I had startled in my first passionate
search for the time-machine, but Weena was a pleasant substitute. Yet all the same they
were soon destined to take far deadlier possession of my mind.
I think I have said how much hotter than our own was the weather of this golden age. I
cannot account for it. It may be that the sun was hotter, or the earth nearer the sun.
It is usual to assume that the sun will go on cooling steadily in the future. But people,
unfamiliar with such speculations as those of the younger Darwin, forget that the planets
must ultimately fall back one by one into the parent body. As these catastrophes occur,
the sun will blaze with renewed energy, and it may be that some inner planet had suffered
this fate. Whatever the reason, the fact remains that the sun was very much hotter than we
know it. Well, one very hot morning, my fourth, I think, as I was seeking shelter from the
heat and glare in a colossal ruin near the great house where I slept and fed, there happened
this strange thing. Clamoring among these heaps of masonry, I found a narrow gallery
whose end and side windows were blocked by fallen masses of stone. By contrast, with
the brilliancy outside, it seemed at first impenetrably dark to me. I entered it, groping,
for the change from light to blackness made spots of color swim before me. Suddenly I
halted spellbound. A pair of eyes, luminous by reflection against the daylight without,
out was watching me out of the darkness. The old, instinctive dread of wild beasts came
upon me. I clenched my hands and steadfastly looked into the glaring eyeballs. I was afraid
to turn. Then the thought of the absolute security in which humanity appeared to be
living came to my mind, and then I remembered that strange terror of the dark. Overcoming
my fear to some extent, I advanced a step and spoke. I will admit that my voice was
harsh and ill-controlled. I put out my hand and touched something soft. At once the eyes
darted sideways and something white ran past me. I turned with my heart in my mouth and
saw a queer little ape-like figure, its head held down in a peculiar manner, running across
the sunlit space behind me. It blundered against a block of granite, staggered aside, and in
a black shadow beneath another pile of ruined masonry. My impression of it is, of course,
imperfect, but I know it was a dull white, and had strange large grayish-red eyes, also
that there was flaxen hair on its head and down its back. But, as I say, it went too
fast for me to see distinctly. I cannot even say whether it ran on all fours or only with
its forearms held very low. After an instant's pause, I followed it into the second heap
of ruins. I could not find it at first, but after a time in the profound obscurity I came
upon one of those round well-like openings of which I have told you half closed by a
fallen pillar. A sudden thought came to me. Could this thing have vanished down the shaft?
I lit a match, and looking down I saw a small, white, moving creature with large, bright
eyes which regarded me steadfastly as it retreated. It made me shudder. It was so like a human
spider. It was clamouring down the wall, and now I saw for the first time a number of metal
foot and hand rests forming a kind of ladder down the shaft. Then the light burned my fingers
and fell out of my hand, going out as it dropped. And when I had lit another, the little monster
had disappeared. I do not know how long I sat peering down that well. It was not for
some time that I could succeed in persuading myself that the thing I had seen was human.
But gradually the truth dawned on me, that man had not remained one species, but had
differentiated into two distinct animals, that my graceful children of the upper world
were not the sole descendants of our generation, but that this bleached, obscene, nocturnal
thing which had flashed before me was also heir to all the ages.
I thought of the flickering pillars, and of my theory of an underground ventilation. I
began to suspect their true import. And what, I wondered, was this lemur doing in my scheme
of a perfectly balanced organization? How was it related to the indolent serenity of
the beautiful upper-worlders? And what was hidden down there, at the foot of that shaft?
I sat upon the edge of the well, telling myself that at any rate there was nothing to fear,
and that there I must descend for the solution of my difficulties. And with all, I was absolutely
afraid to go.
As I hesitated, two of the beautiful upper-world people came running in their amorous sport
across the daylight in the shadow. The male pursued the female, flinging flowers at her
as he ran. They seemed distressed to find me, my arm against the overturned pillar peering
down the well. Apparently it was considered bad form to remark these apertures, for when
I pointed to this one and tried to frame a question about it in their tongue, they were
still more visibly distressed and turned away. But they were interested by my matches, and
I struck some to amuse them. I tried them again about the well, and again I failed.
So presently I left them, meaning to go back to Weena and see what I could get from her.
But my mind was already in revolution, my guesses and impressions were slipping and
sliding to a new adjustment. I had now a clue to the import of these wells, to the ventilating
towers, to the mystery of the ghosts, to say nothing of a hint at the meaning of the bronze
gates and the fate of the time-machine. And very vaguely there came a suggestion towards
the solution of the economic problem that had puzzled me. Here was the new view. Plainly,
this second species of man was subterranean. There were three circumstances in particular
which made me think that its rare emergence above ground was the outcome of a long-continued
underground habit. In the first place there was the bleached look common in most animals
that live largely in the dark. The white fish of the Kentucky Caves, for instance. Then
those large eyes with that capacity for reflecting light are common features of nocturnal things,
witness the owl and the cat. And last of all, that evident confusion in the sunshine, that
hasty, yet fumbling, awkward flight towards dark shadow, and that peculiar carriage of
the head while in the light, all reinforced the theory of an extreme sensitiveness of
the retina. Beneath my feet, then, the earth must be tunneled enormously, and these tunnelings
were the habitat of the new race. The presence of ventilating shafts and wells along the
hill slopes, everywhere, in fact, except along the river valley, showed how universal
were its ramifications. What so natural, then, as to assume that it was in this artificial
underworld that such work as was necessary to the comfort of the daylight race was done?
The notion was so plausible that I at once accepted it, and went on to assume the how
of this splitting of the human species. I dare say you will anticipate the shape of
my theory, though for myself I very soon felt that it fell far short of the truth. At first,
proceeding from the problems of our own age, it seemed clear as daylight to me that the
gradual widening of the present merely temporary and social difference between the capitalist
and the labourer was the key to the whole position. No doubt it will seem grotesque
enough to you, and wildly incredible, and yet even now there are existing circumstances
to point that way. There is a tendency to utilize underground space for the less ornamental
purposes of civilization. There is the Metropolitan Railway in London, for instance. There are
new electric railways. There are subways. There are underground workrooms and restaurants,
and they increase and multiply. Evidently, I thought, this tendency had increased till
industry had gradually lost its birthright in the sky. I mean that it had gone deeper
and deeper into larger and ever larger underground factories, spending a still increasing amount
of its time therein till in the end, even now, does not an East End worker live in such
artificial conditions as practically to be cut off from the natural surface of the earth?
Again, the exclusive tendency of richer people do, no doubt, to the increasing refinement
of their education and the widening gulf between them and the rude violence of the poor is
already leading to the closing in their interest of considerable portions of the surface of
the land. About London, for instance, perhaps half the prettier country is shut in against
intrusion, and this same widening gulf, which is due to the length and expense of the higher
educational process and the increased facilities for and temptations towards refined habits
on the part of the rich, will make that exchange between class and class, that promotion by
intermarriage which at present retards the splitting of our species along the lines of
social stratification, less and less frequent. So, in the end, above ground you must have
the haves, pursuing pleasure and comfort and beauty, and below ground the have-nots, the
workers getting continually adapted to the conditions of their labor. Once they were
there, they would no doubt have to pay rent and not a little of it for the ventilation
of their caverns, and if they refused, they would starve or be suffocated for arrears.
Such of them as were so constituted as to be miserable and rebellious would die, and
in the end, the balance being permanent, the survivors would become as well adapted to
the conditions of underground life and as happy in their way as the upper world people
were to theirs, as it seemed to me the refined beauty and the atoliated pallor followed naturally
enough. The great triumph of humanity I had dreamed of took a different shape in my mind.
It had been no such triumph of moral education and general cooperation as I had imagined.
Instead, I saw a real aristocracy, armed with a perfected science and working to a logical
conclusion the industrial system of today. Its triumph had not been simply a triumph
over nature, but a triumph over nature and the fellow man. This, I must warn you, was
my theory at the time. I had no convenient cistern in the pattern of the utopian books.
My explanation may be absolutely wrong. I still think it is the most plausible one,
but even on this supposition the balanced civilization that was at last attained must
have long since passed its zenith and was now far fallen into decay. The too-perfect
security of the upper-worlders had led them to a slow movement of degeneration, to a general
dwindling in size, strength and intelligence. That I could see clearly enough already. What
had happened to the undergrounders I did not yet suspect, but from what I had seen of the
Morlocks that by the way was the name by which these creatures were called, I could imagine
that the modification of the human type was even far more profound than among the Eloi,
the beautiful race that I already knew. Then came troublesome doubts. Why had the Morlocks
taken my time-machine? For I felt sure it was they who had taken it. Why too, if the
Eloi were masters, could they not restore the machine to me? And why were they so terribly
afraid of the dark? I proceeded, as I have said, to question Weena about this underworld,
but here again I was disappointed. At first she would not understand my questions, and
presently she refused to answer them. She shivered, as though the topic was unendurable,
and when I pressed her, perhaps a little harshly, she burst into tears. They were the only tears,
except my own, I ever saw in that golden age. When I saw them, I ceased abruptly to trouble
about the Morlocks, and was only concerned in banishing these signs of the human inheritance
from Weena's eyes, and very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands, while I solemnly burned
a match.